The Joe Rogan experience.
A real parallel is when you were talking about th these large-scale meat
processing plants are a perfect sort of Petri dish
for viruses to grow. So our factory farms,
and so are these farms where you're stuffing pigs next week,
you're doing all this unnatural stuff, right?
It's unnatural for people to be stuffed into a warehouse right next to each
other shoulder, to shoulder working all day.
It's unnatural for them to be stuffed in these homes, shoulder, to shoulder,
with bad food and,
and all the things that you would need to keep your body healthy and strong.
The same can be said about these factory farms, situ situations.
One thing that I find so attractive about the way you run your farm is that
there's no weirdness in watching these animals during the day. They,
they seem like animals just doing normal stuff.
If you see a chicken wandering around, just packing up the grass, looks normal,
see a chicken in a cage, getting fed out of a little cup or something.
It looks all kinds of up, right? It doesn't feel right now, right? No.
That's what we, you know, we, um, we have the phrase, uh,
respecting the thickness of the pig and the chicken, this of the chicken. And.
We know that these diseases are all coming from these place. I mean,
there's a ton of agricultural diseases, you know,
that are based from these factory farm situations where these animals live in
these really horrific conditions. And then the bacteria jump in.
Look, I mean, there, there, there eat. Look, if you ate in your toilet, every,
you know, would you like to keep your toilet every day, right? Uh that's.
That's how they eat your they're breathing in their fecal particulate matter,
which is, um, you know, uh, putting lesions in their, uh,
tender respiratory membranes, uh, making, making, uh, lesions there.
Uh, and,
and so w when you have those kinds of conditions and they're not getting
exercise, they're not getting fresh air. And so, uh, I mean, the,
the, uh, they're not getting salad,
they're not getting any vitamin D from the sunshine. Uh,
and so what happens is you get an extremely concentrated
host.
Host facility.
For pathogenicity. Mm. Th th that's what happens.
You get a very concentrated host facility, because there's always a host,
they're close to each other. The pathogen doesn't have to say, wow, boy,
I wonder if I can make it that, you know, that half mile over to another no,
they're, you know, they're always right there. And so you're right. It's like,
it's like an incubator. And so, you know, if we wanted to sit down and look,
if we wanted to sit down and say, let's say we had a James Bond, uh,
conspirators, you know, uh, and said, we're going to form a committee and, uh,
and make a pathogen friendly farm, you know,
the old James Bond nemesis. Right. And so we formed a committee to say,
how can we make a pathogen friendly farm? Well, we would have only one species.
We'd crowd it up. We'd take out the oxygen, the, the fresh air,
the sunshine we'd give it. We we'd give it a, a minimalistic diet.
What I've just described is modern, efficient,
industrial factory farming. You couldn't design a better system,
uh, for, for, uh, conductivity of pathogenicity.
Now here's the big question.
Is it possible to feed all of Los Angeles
using your methods? Can you,
can you feed big urban areas using these regenerative.
Methods? Sure, absolutely. So, uh, so,
so two things to realize is the, the bottleneck in the food system right now,
the reason the supermarket is low on meat is not because there aren't animals in
the field. It's because of the pro the processing is the, it's not the trucking,
it's not the production. It's not even the, it's not even the store shelf. It's,
it's the processing. So it's the processing, that's the bottleneck. And so,
uh, so, so my vision is that, so, so,
so we can get to two questions, first of all, let's deal with the production,
uh, with the production. Absolutely. If we, if we spread out the production,
if we, if we did, for example, you know, uh,
if we took all the confinement chicken houses and put those chickens on pasture,
no problem. Okay.
It doesn't take any more land to grow the feed
for a chicken on pasture than it does in a confinement.
House. You get a lot more lost though,
due to Raptors and things along those lines.
No, no, no. We, we put it, we put them in, uh, in little, uh,
protected shelters. Uh, then we move them every day across the pasture. Well,
yeah, you, you can get losses from, from rappers,
but we use guard geese or there a guard, dogs, guard, llamas,
there's all sorts of guard animals. There's, there's really cool. Uh,
and there's, and there's a lot of research being done to jam the radar of,
you know, Eagles and stuff really. Oh yeah. Oh yeah.
They jammed the rate. I didn't even know they had radar.
Well, that's figurative.
Right? What are they using when they, when,
when an Eagle it's just not just their vision's insanely good.
Right? Yeah. In particular, it, it really is. It really is. And so, for example,
I know one guy that's, uh, he's, it's not,
it's not ready to sell yet,
but he claims to have had great success, um,
putting reflective, uh,
Coke can bottoms on like a traffic cone,
hanging it out with his chickens and that splays the sun,
rays all out and messes up the eyesight of the, of the Eagles and the Hawks.
They, they can't zero in really, in in fact,
this was exactly, um, one of the defensive measures,
the U S Navy used and still uses for incoming missiles
that they, they, they have a Canon that blows out pieces of, um,
aluminum foil basically, and like a graffiti,
aluminum foil graffiti out of the air. And it jams the, whatever the, you know,
the honing devices of a, of a missile, the Hawks are the same way.
What I'm getting at is that there, there are, we don't lose very much.
We protect them greatly.
There are a lot of things that you can do to, you know,
to mitigate that kind of pressure. But,
but the fact is the industry loses tons of birds too,
in a flood, in a heat wave, in a whatever, you know? And, um,
and so the idea that these birds in this big confinement
house are actually protected from malady.
This is simply not, is simply not good.
And they're going to be much more of them are going to get sick and sure.
They might have losses in that way.
Sure, sure. So, so can we produce, can we produce the food this way? Absolutely.
Now one of the things that it would require is many more people on
farms. So, you know, I've thought a lot about, um,
obviously as unemployment has skyrocketed through this
right now, sitting here, it's hard for us to imagine what it'll take to bring,
you know, to fill football stadiums again,
to F to film Caribbean cruises, to fill theaters,
um, you know, uh, music venues, you know, um,
whatever boxing matches. I mean,
right now it's hard to conceive what it'll take.
People are so terrified.
It's hard to appreciate how much of this is going to come back,
the hospitality industry and all that. So, so, so what's going to happen. So,
so where are the jobs, what are people going to do? And,
and I would suggest that one of the things that that people can do is that we
can have a lot of these smaller plants and we have a
way more people actually growing food,
participating in food production personally,
is food going to be more expensive, maybe so,
but you get to be healthy and we have a healthy planet
and what's that worth. And.
How much more do you think it would cost for? I mean,
if you just give a rough percentage,
if you're thinking about food production right now with the current situation,
there's a lot of automation, right? A lot of these factory farms,
they don't require too many people to be working.
You would require much more people get, you'd have to manage these animals.
You'd have to do it sort of along the lines of the way that you do,
how many more people you think would be involved in a large scale film. Uh,
lots and lots of people.
I, I don't have, I don't have a number there, but I can tell you that, um,
that prices would, uh, you know,
food prices might go up to what they were 30 years ago. And.
It also,
would it be fair to say that food prices might go to where they should be like a
cheeseburger really shouldn't be nine, 9 cents?
No, absolutely. Uh, the, the, as,
as you're very familiar with the argument of the externalized costs, they don't,
they don't get captured. What's, what's the cost, you know, right now,
50% of the cases of diarrhea in the U S are caused by a foodborne
bacteria. Well, what's a, what's a case of diarrhea. Worse. Yeah. I mean,
if we start.
If you start, if.
You start putting dollars on these externalized costs, you know, the,
the dead zone in the, in the Gulf of Mexico, the fact that we have, you know,
score hundreds of square miles, that don't grow shrimp anymore, you know,
because it's, it's toxic from the runoff, from the Mississippi, uh, from,
from chemical farming. So there's, there's a lot of these externalized costs.
And not only that, but if this actually became normal, uh,
the, the, whatever, the new way, the new orthodoxy, uh,
there would be definitely a economies of scale that we don't have right now. Um,
I mean, I'll just give you one example that probably nobody would think of.
So we play, we pay workman's compensation at our farm.
So how do you determine the exposure level, the risk factor of a poultry worker?
I mean, think about if, if you have a Tyson chicken farm and you hire a, uh, uh,
an employee to be in the chicken house,
think about his workman's comp risk. I mean,
there's fecal particulate all day long that he's breathing. Uh,
you've got augers chains, feed bins,
electrical connections, dust. I mean, it's, it's a very,
um, it's a high risk situation for us.
A poultry worker goes out in the field and move some,
move some chickens in a field. There's no fecal particulate, there's no dust.
There's no, uh, you know, uh, there's no augers, there's no,
um, whatever spinning fans, uh, vent shafts, you know,
there's none of this. And so, so part of the cost,
the reason that our chicken is more expensive than what's in the store is not
only externalized costs, but it is,
it is unrecognized unrecognized
savings that we offer that can't be
captured in a square peg in a round hole. Mm.
I see what you're saying. Yeah. The,
the overall big picture of health for you health for the food,
how much is that worth? Yeah. Right.
That's interesting that we're not really taking into consideration these
secondary costs that come about from doing it the wrong way.
Yeah. W w we're not, we're not, uh, I mean, there's, there's a lot of those,
uh, you can much,
much of our increased costs has nothing to do with actual production
costs. It's,
it's the regulatory overheads,
uh, and this,
and this of course is why we don't have more community small-scale avatars
around the country, uh, is not because there's not a demand for them.
It's because the, the, the paperwork, the Hasset plants,
hazardous analysis, critical control point plans,
and the paperwork to be able to launch a business like
this require the,
are so high. The, the, the both time and money are so high,
that it's very difficult to launch a small business, you know,
cause you can't spread the overhead of capitalization.
Over. Is there a solution? Is it.
Well, uh, there, there are a couple solutions, certainly one, one that's,
um,
that's being championed right now by Congressman Thomas Massey called the prime
act. He's had it in for five years and, uh, amazingly,
it's kind of just floundered for five years.
All of a sudden in the last two months he's got 18 new co-sponsors because of
this and what the prime act would do. It would allow,
it would allow uninspected custom processed meat
in-state to be sold by the piece that's not legal
right now, right now, the only way that you can sell a T-bone,
if you want to buy a T-bone steak for you,
the only way for you to get it is for me to go to a federal inspected slaughter
house, get the animal processed,
packaged under inspection and put in for you.
Custom houses are where if you want to buy a half a beef, a quarter beef,
all right.
And it goes in with your name on that quarter and they're custom processing it
for me. Yeah. Then, you know, then I can buy it. And what,
what Congressman Massey is saying with the prime act is why should we
discriminate? And only allow people to tap into the lower cost and lower,
lower, uh, uh,
overheads of the custom processing facility to only those
people who can afford to buy a quarter of beef at a time. That's,
that's very poverty discriminatory.
Let's open that up so that people can buy it, buy the piece.
We're not going to ship it interstate. We're not going to sell it at Walmart.
Okay. There's but if you and I,
as neighbors want to do business together as a,
and I'm using a powerful phrasing here as consenting adults.
If we want to exercise freedom of joy of choice and
participate in a consensual relationship of
commerce, why should that be a bureaucrats,
uh, uh, business between, you know, between two consenting neighbors?
Right?
So what you're saying is, is long, but is the,
the regulatory process in place to make sure that people are using the proper
sanitation methods, making sure that the animals are healthy,
making sure that all these things are in place.
So that unscrupulous characters don't take advantage of the system and then
screw over the consumer. And the consumer gets sick.
Like this is like best case scenario for the regulation, right.
That it's there to protect us. Well.
That's, that's the, um, that's the assumption. Yes. Um,
and I would simply ask, uh,
that at some point, when you have a very close, transparent relationship,
one-on-one you don't, you don't have, you know,
truckers and warehouses and big slaughterhouses and, and, and, you know,
supermarkets, blah, blah, blah. In between us. There is,
there is a lot of protection in that
relational transaction that beats all the paperwork you can amass
on the industrial scale. We,
we recognize scale in a lot of things in life. For example, in Virginia,
where I'm from, if you want to open a, if you want to do daycare,
let's say you want to do a work at home deal. You know,
you want to do a side gig and, and keep children.
You can keep up to three in your home without subjecting yourself to the
licensing and compliance of daycare regulations,
because they know if all you're going to do is keep three in your homes,
those parents you're going to have a close relationship with them.
It's this is not a, this is not a daycare center. All right. All right.
The same thing is true with elder care. Uh,
my wife's grandmother spent her last year in a lady's home who is allowed to
keep three people as elder care. She was an RN.
She wanted to not have to go to the hospital every day and started a side
gig in her home. She cooked for them. She took care of them.
Three of them in her home. Does this vary state by state?
It does vary state by state. I'm just giving you an example of where,
of where RISD, where,
where it's reasonable to appreciate that a different relationship at
scale. Yes.
Can create its own safety in that particular
thing. Can you keep a hundred in your home without a license? No,
but three, if you're only going to keep three,
you're probably going to see them.
You're probably going to have a direct relationship with each of their,
of their caregivers. They're, you know,
they're people that are signing off for them. It's a different relationship.
And so all I would say is that, uh, from the safety issue,
that there needs to be someplace a point at
which we can opt to do business with each
other, without a bureaucrat involved.
Let me ask you this. If you wanted to slaughter a cow, and then you wanted to,
uh, give some of the meat away to your neighbor,
would you have to bring it to some sort of a facility.
Perfectly legal, perfectly legal? So this is not, yeah. If it were,
if this were all about safety, right? You wouldn't be able to do that. So,
so the important thing to realize is that the,
the prohibition here is not on the in fact,
our neighbor can even buy it legally. Oh really? I can't, I just can't sell it.
So the prohibition is only on.
One. If you can't sell it, how are they going to buy it.
Black market. So, so, so if, if, if I, if,
if I, if I did this under the radar, okay. So I,
I butcher a chicken in my backyard and the neighbor comes over and buys it from
me. Okay. It's legal for him. It's legal for him to buy it.
It's not legal for me to sell it, but every,
but everything else in society that we've discerned determined as a hazardous,
a controlled substance hazardous substance,
the prohibition is both on seller and buyer. Right. Uh,
and I don't want to go down that rabbit hole either. I'm a,
I'm a pretty libertarian, you know, drug, uh, let it all go. But, um, but,
but without regard to that, the, the,
the prohibitions are equal on even possession.
If you want to, if you want to have a ton of cocaine in your house,
you even, if you just want it over there in a corner, on a pallet. Yeah.
I've got a ton of cocaine here. What, what's wrong with that?
You can't have that. Right. But when it comes to food products,
the prohibitions are only on one side and they don't
include if you give it away. So if it was really dangerous,
you shouldn't be able to buy it.
You shouldn't be able to possess it and you shouldn't be able to give it away.
I.
Said, I see what you're saying. Kind of, but the differences, first of all,
cocaine is illegal. Beef's not illegal. And second of all, it's like,
you're trying to, the idea is you're trying to protect the consumer, right?
And I think that they have exceptions for these small situations where you're
the farmer and this,
maybe this guy's growing tomatoes and you trade him some Philemon Yon for some
tomatoes and you have a good deal there. That makes sense that they, you know,
I think it's more reasonable that they step back and let that happen.
But it is odd that they can buy unregulated beef,
but you can't sell unregulated beef. So it's like, well,
how'd you get that beef? I bought it. Is it regulated? No. All right.
Don't even go. Who's, who's the criminal selling you than the beef. Yeah.
It's very strange. But.
The FA the farmers, the one that's liable,
the buyer that the customer is not, but the same thing is true. I mean,
the important let's, let's appreciate too, for example, a wildlife.
I mean, right now you can go out and, uh,
during hunting season and you can shoot a deer and you don't have to worry about
temperature. You don't have to, you don't have to worry about any inspections,
nothing, or a wild pig, right. Squirrel,
you can bring that home and there's, there's no inspection, no,
nothing over that. And you can dress that yourself. I mean, you know,
butcher it, package it, whatever, feed it to your children.
You can have a block party, invite all your, your block and have, uh, and,
and feed everybody with that food. That's perfectly legal,
but to do a chicken or a pig or a cow
at all on your own and, and sell that,
what is, what is it about,
about selling something that suddenly turns it from benign to hazard?
Well, I think it's just protection for the consumer. And I think it's also like,
it'd be fine if it was a small neighborhood where you knew the farmer and you
had a great, great relationship with them,
but they're talking about doing things at scale. When new,
when you're talking about selling food to, you know, a large city, it's,
you can't really just hope the guy did a good job.
That's the argument for regulation.
The argument is that regulation is when things scale up, well,
you need someone to step in and protect the consumers,
because if there is one bad actor, who's not taking care of it.
He has the potential of sickening, thousands of people.
Right. Which is, which is the argument. Exactly.
The argument for decentralizing and de
amalgamating, as opposed to centralizing and amalgamating.
Okay. Well, is it a land issue though? Like if you wanted it,
like the factory farms that I've seen in videos where they have these pigs,
they're stuffed next to each other in his large warehouse and the same with the
chickens, right?
How much space would you need to have the same amount of chickens and the same
amount of pigs, if you let them free range. All right.
Here's, here's my point.
What you don't see in those videos is you don't see the
hundreds of acres growing corn and soybeans to feed them in that
house. The industry wants you to think that this is some sort of, uh, uh,
you know, uh, an island, you know, we're, we're looking,
we're cranking this out of this house.
They're not showing you the tractor trailers, bringing in the grain,
bringing in the F and hauling out the manure and the square miles of,
of fields to spread the manure. Okay.
They're not showing you how dependent that is on this massive land base.
And so, so on, in the pastured model,
the de-centralized pastured model, instead of having 15,000,
I mean, our farm, we're going to raise like 45,000 chickens this summer.
We're not, we're not backyard by any means, but guess what?
Those are in 275
bird shelters that are moved every day across pastures.
It doesn't take one more acre to produce the feed or
handle the manure, whether the chicken is outside or inside.
The difference is when you come and see our operation, you see all the land.
When you see the factory farm, you don't see any of the land, but isn't.
It possible that these factory farms are set up where the farms,
where the animals are raised are completely separate.
It's a separate from the farms where the soybeans and the coroner raised, well,
ours is done on the same property. No.
It's ours is too. We, we, we buy, we buy our grain from neighbors. Absolutely.
But if they had to grow these animals and grow that food,
would they have enough land to do everything together in the same farm.
But there's no need to do it on the same farm.
I'm a big believer in mutual mutual interdependence, uh,
not complete independence. We don't have any intention to grow our own grain.
We, we don't have the soils for it. We don't have the equipment for it.
We don't have the skill set for it. So we buy from neighbors who do GMO-free,
non-genetically modified GMO-free grain, uh, and,
and we give them more than they would on a commodity on a commodity
scale. Um,
and so they love us because we're giving them more per bushel and they have a
nice secure buyer and they're local, they're close. Uh, you know,
we're not getting it from, you know, uh, foreign countries and it's all close.
So what happens is in,
in the kind of situation I'm describing,
instead of having a fundamentally segregated food system,
you have a fundamentally integrated.
I see what you're saying is what happens,
strong relationship with people growing. Yeah.
So for example, I mean, you started the discussion with can Los Angeles,
you know, there's enough land to feed Los Angeles, you know, that, uh, and we,
and we could discuss whether there's where the Los Angeles should be as big as
it is. I mean, that's a valid discussion. It's a very valid discussion, but,
but, but Le we, we can go there, but first, let me just say that if California,
for example, did not export,
I don't know what the percentage is, but it's huge, you know, Allman's, uh,
all over the world. If California is centered on feeding California,
there's absolutely enough here to feed California. Okay. I mean, Iowa,
Iowa imports,
90% Iowa is probably the most fertile place in the world
and they only eat only,
only 10% of the food consumed in Iowa is grown in Iowa
and processed in Iowa. That's pretty crazy. It is crazy Hawaii,
only 5%,
95% comes from off Hawaii. I mean, they've got ranches.
They've got, I mean,
why would you have to import stuff if you can grow pineapples, pineapples,
and, uh, you know, macadamia nuts in your backyard, come on, you know? Um,
so there's a, there's a huge, there's a huge disconnect. I mean, um,
the, the, the, the, the pro the,
and this is one of the reasons that we're having this. I think this,
this blow back from nature is that instead of having a fundamentally
integrated system, I mean, think of how, uh, in Switzerland, you know,
they take the cows up to the mountain, pastures, they milk,
and the milk flows down, uh, uh, the, and they make cheese up there.
The way from the cheese goes into the, into the pigs,
the pigs eat the way.
And so instead of transporting milk to a centralized
cheesemaker and pigs to a centralized processor,
they're actually making the cheese on site.
So all they've got to actually transport is cheese and,
um, and, and pork. So they slaughter, they slaughter, you know,
contiguous near, nearby, not on the same farm necessarily, but, but nearby.
So you don't have all this transportation.
What you have is a fundamentally de-centralized. We could even say,
democratized, can we say food, distance, food,
food, food, distancing, um, that,
that creates resiliency in the system.
So instead of being tied to these a hundred or 150 mega processing
facilities, we're, de-centralized throughout the land fan base.
W how much more money do you think it would cost for food? We,
we kind of touched on this earlier,
but if you're dealing with this more natural based system,
and it's more complex, it's going to require more people,
and it's going to require a complete restructuring of the system that's
currently in place.
Um, I think I don't have a figure, uh, for.
Science. Well, I.
Think, I think in general it would be probably double what you'd pay at Costco.
Yeah. That's an issue for a lot of folks though. Right.
But now think about this, think about this. Um,
you, uh, oh man, where do you start with this? Um,
first of all, you're gonna, you're going to offer a lot of jobs there.
A lot of people that are going to be looking for jobs right now. So,
so this offers a lot of job opportunities. Number two,
it's much more healing on the land. Number three,
you don't have all the pathogenicity, you know, uh, you don't have to use, uh,
drugs, antibiotics. I mean, our, our, our meat doesn't do drugs. Okay.
Our dinner doesn't do drugs. Uh, people don't realize that, you know,
two thirds of the drugs used in the country, aren't in people,
they're in animals. Okay. So you don't have those issues.
There are a lot of issues that you, that you don't have. And those,
those add up in the big picture.
So I always tell people our food is the cheapest aggregate
food. There is. We just put all the costs in all our,
all our costs are in. Okay. And so we're not,
we're not asking taxpayers society, the planet.
We're not asking them to pick up the tab for, you know, for cheating, for,
for cutting, for cutting corners.
And.
What's, what's interesting is that that, uh, 40 years ago, right now,
today 9% of the average, um,
person's income, 9% is spent on food. That's our average in our country,
40 years ago, it was 18, 40 years ago.
9% of our personal income was spent on healthcare today.
That's 18%. Uh, isn't that interesting? How those have inverted? Yeah.
Those have inverted in rough, in roughly 40 years.
Ever since the USDA called the USDA, uh,
created the food pyramid and put Twinkies and cocoa puffs on the bottom as a
foundational. And you can track the diabetes.
Uh, you can track obesity,
you can track all of these things right through from that time.
[Inaudible].